============================================================
SOURCE  : Compliance
FILE    : Compliance_Practices_in_Garment_Industries_in_Dhak.pdf
PAGES   : 11 kept of 17 total
CHUNKS  : 30  | Size: 1000  | Overlap: 100
============================================================

[CHUNK 1]
yield to the wishes of another. RMG sector of Bangladesh needs to improve the 
factory working environment and various social issues related to the industry. 
International buyers are very particular about compliance with codes of conduct 
before placing any import order. Poor housekeeping, storage system, ineffective 
monitoring and controlling system, disorganized production layout, lack of team 
based work, rented factory premises, narrow staircases, closed environment, 
insufficient light and air, clean drinking water, separate wash room for male and 
female, etc. are common practices in most of the RMG factories in Bangladesh.



[CHUNK 2]
ash room for male and 
female, etc. are common practices in most of the RMG factories in Bangladesh. 
Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association(BGMEA) and 
Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BKMEA) set 
standards for compliance like factories must have alternative stairs, basic fire 
equipment, approved layout plan from concerned authority for ensuring safe 
building construction, group insurance for workers, hygienic sanitation facility and 
first aid appliance, as well as ensuring minimum wages and flexible jobs for the 
workers. There are many recognized compliance bodies worldwide like ILO, ISO 
14001, WRAP, BSCI, ETI, SAI, FLA. Owners of RMG factories and government 
can seek help from those bodies to improve the standard of environment as well as 
products of theie industries. In this paper, the existing compliance practices of RMG 
factories in Bangladesh, partcularly factories located in Dhaka city, are examined.

[CHUNK 3]
ractices of RMG 
factories in Bangladesh, partcularly factories located in Dhaka city, are examined. 
This paper also tries to reveal the acceptability of compliance provisions to the 
employed workers. 
1.1 Objectives of Study 
The objectives of the study are as follows: 
To provide an overview of the present compliance situation in the garment 
factories in Dhaka city. 
ii. To find out the acceptability of compliance provisions among the existing 
employee group. 
iii. To find out the problems and prospects of compliance in garment industry. 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
The Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) 
has formulated its own code of conduct for the industry, in collaboration with the 
major trade unions, and has set up a compliance unit that monitors labor conditions 
in its members' factories (UNIFEM 2008). In 2006, the Government passed a new 
labor code, after 12 years of deliberation and activism.

[CHUNK 4]
008). In 2006, the Government passed a new 
labor code, after 12 years of deliberation and activism. It applies to all workers, and 
the new sections relevant to the garment industry include written contracts and 
identity cards, timely payment of wages, revised minimum wage, paid maternity 

leave and explicit laws against sexual harassment. The export-quota system and the 
availability of cheap labor are the two main reasons behind the success of the 
industry (Haider 2007). But unfortunately in many RMG factories the labors are 
often seen being deprived of their rights. According to Amin (2009), Coordinator of 
the Bangladesh Garment Workers Unity Council (BGWUC), The garment workers 
of Bangladesh may be the most deprived labor force in the world. Most are paid 
between US$14 and US$16 per month, the lowest salary in the world. He also 
added Only a few factories here maintain international standards, and many of 
them do not implement any worker health and safety measures.

[CHUNK 5]
n international standards, and many of 
them do not implement any worker health and safety measures. The Financial 
Express (2008), a daily English newspaper of Bangladesh, referred to a recent study 
conducted by a local think tank that has revealed that investors in the RMG sector 
have more than doubled their earnings in the past seven years. Despite this increase, 
however, it is a remorse that many owners are not paying their laborers regularly 
and all sorts of extraneous arguments are put forward for non-payment of their 
salaries. New Age (2009), another prominent daily English newspaper, reported that 
the majority of garment factories do not yet comply with many wage and workplace 
standards specified in the tripartite agreement of 2006. At the global level, 
campaigns have drawn attention to abuses of workers' rights in global supply chains 
and put pressure on international corporations to take greater responsibility for 
employees through corporate codes of conduct.

[CHUNK 6]
ional corporations to take greater responsibility for 
employees through corporate codes of conduct. Local employers in the Bangladesh 
garment industry must now demonstrate compliance with these codes to win orders 
from international buyers (UNIFEM 2008). According to International Labor 
Organization (2010), buyers make sourcing decisions based on four factors: price, 
quality, how long it takes to get produce to the marketplace and social compliance, 
including compliance with labor standards. 
In order to export readymade garments, it is not only the quality parameters that 
are important towards acceptance of the product as per the intended end use, but 
also the working environment, in which the garments are to be produced, is equally 
important so that sweatshop concept is totally taken care of and the code of conduct 
must be stretched towards achieving the objectives of social compliance issues (Das 
2008).

[CHUNK 7]
conduct 
must be stretched towards achieving the objectives of social compliance issues (Das 
2008). Research showed that when companies that dealt with foreign buyers 
adhered to codes of conduct, conditions improved for the workers in the factories 
stated by (Mahmud) in one of her articles. In some large factories, health and safety 
standards improved and other benefits were introduced such as timely payment of 
salaries, proper overtime rates and maternity leave. Haider (2007) in his study stated 
that the social dimensions of the RMG industry are getting more attention from 
consumers, social workers, welfare organizations and brand name international 
buyers. International buyers are very particular about compliance with codes of 
conduct. Currently, many international buyers demand compliance with their code

[CHUNK 8]
ance with codes of 
conduct. Currently, many international buyers demand compliance with their code 

of conduct before placing any garment import order. The factory working 
environment is not very satisfactory. So in order to sustain in the industry, 
Bangladesh needs to improve the factory working environment and various social 
issues related to the RMG industry. Informal recruitment, low literacy level, wage 
discrimination, irregular payment and short contracts of service are very common 
practices in the RMG factories in Bangladesh. People s Daily Online China (2008) 
reported that the Bangladeshi caretaker government is to take stern action from 
August 1 against owners of garment factories who failed to implement compliance 
issues like providing minimum wage to workers.

[CHUNK 9]
garment factories who failed to implement compliance 
issues like providing minimum wage to workers. German Embassy (2010) stated 
that PROGRESS, a joint project of the Bangladesh Ministry of Commerce and the 
German Federal Ministry, has consequently turned its full attention to the area of 
social compliance and assisting the government in the following areas: 
implementation of the new labor law, media campaigns, training and retraining 
measures for compliance inspectors, advisors, and the introduction of a new 
monitoring and evaluation system. According to Hameeda Hossain, Convener of the 
Shromik Nirapotta Forum, newspaper reports and statements by business leaders 
suggest that they may now be willing to recognize genuine labor problems which is 
reflected by the fact that BGMEA and BKMEA are reported to have conceded the 
need to revise pay scales, issue employment letters, non-enforcement of overtime. 
The question of safety conditions was also raised. 
3.

[CHUNK 10]
oyment letters, non-enforcement of overtime. 
The question of safety conditions was also raised. 
3. METHODOLOGY 
Both descriptive and inferential research were conducted to identify different 
dimensions of compliance of garment industry, such as housekeeping storage, 
working environment, production layout and controlling system, and management 
policies and practices in Bangladesh. The focus of the research is the lower level 
male and female workers of the garment industries located in Dhaka. Both primary 
and secondary sources were used in this study. Primary data was collected through a 
structured questionnaire (with a likert type 5 point scale) from 150 operating level 
employees of 10 garment industry located in Dhaka city. For primary data, 
interview survey was carefully designed and conducted to evaluate the technical 
compliance performance of garment industry.

[CHUNK 11]
efully designed and conducted to evaluate the technical 
compliance performance of garment industry. Secondary data were collected by 
consulting official documents of garment industries, internet, industry manuals, 
audit reports, annual reports, articles, etc. The data were collected during 2009. 
Statistical Package of the Social Sciences (SPSS Software) was used for analyzing 
data. 

Hypotheses 
H0: Garment industries in Dhaka city are practicing compliance policies and 
procedures. 
H1: Garment industries in Dhaka city are not practicing compliance policies and 
procedures. 
4. EMPIRICAL FINDINGS 
This study has tried to measure the extent to which the garment industries are 
following their compliance obligations or not. Collected data were analyzed and 
interpreted in line with the objective of this study. From the analysis, the mean and 
standard deviation of all variables have been calculated separately.

[CHUNK 12]
rom the analysis, the mean and 
standard deviation of all variables have been calculated separately. Means are 
indicative of the variables acceptability, on the basis of compliance standard, 
whereas standard deviations are idicative of deviation among the respondents 
response. 
The respondents were asked about housekeeping storage facilities of the 
organization. In responses to this question, 40 percent of the respondents strongly 
agree that their organization has a good housekeeping facility while 21 percent of 
the respondents are agree about this statement, with a mean of 3.93 which lies in 
between Agree and Neutral of the scale and standard deviation 1.2. The respondents 
were asked whether the storage facility is well organized or not. About 67 percent 
replied that their organizations have a very well organized storage facility, with a 
mean of 3.93 whice lies in between agree and neutral of the scale the and standard 
deviation 1.2.

[CHUNK 13]
mean of 3.93 whice lies in between agree and neutral of the scale the and standard 
deviation 1.2. From the analysis it is noted that 33.33 percent are strongly agree 
with the statement that the operations are handled efficiently, whereas 13.33 percent 
are strongly disagree with this statement, with a mean of 3.53 which lies in between 
Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation 1.51. Although majority of the 
respondents (63.34%) are either strongly agree or agree that the current compliance 
systems have improved work posture for greater efficiency, 20 percent respondents 
have given negative answer to this question. In this case the mean is 3.8 which lies 
in between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation is 1.62. 
It is observed from the analysis that out of 150 respondents 60 have given their 
strong positive answer regarding the improvement of the controlling and monitoring 
system which has led the organization to minimize mistakes.

[CHUNK 14]
ement of the controlling and monitoring 
system which has led the organization to minimize mistakes. But a significant 
number of respondents (20 percent) disagree with this statement. The mean is 3.67 
which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation is 1.62. 

Regarding flexibility and responsibility of the job,70 percent of the respondents 
strongly felt that they have responsible and flexible job and a considerable portion 
of respondents have neutral thinking regarding this issue, which calculated mean is 
3.93 and deviation among the respondents response was 1.69. In regard to the 
question whether the organization removes fatigue to keep employees alert and 
productive, a majority portion (65%) opine positively, whereas a sizeable percent of 
respondents didn t comment regarding this. Here the mean has been calculated as 
3.99 which indicates the employees agreeableness proportion while respondents 
responses deviate from each other up-to 1.73.

[CHUNK 15]
employees agreeableness proportion while respondents 
responses deviate from each other up-to 1.73. Workers were asked about how far 
the production layout is appropriate for their given task. In this regard, most of 
respondents replied that they are working in a standard production layout though a 
considerable (30 percent of respondents) contradict with this positive impression of 
the workers. It indicates that nonetheless employees are satisfied with their 
production outline; they have, to some extent difficulties for working with the 
present production design. Respondents were asked how far organization permits 
and persuade group work. Sixty percent and 30 percent of total respondents 
respectively give their strong positive opinion and optimistic attitude regarding this 
matter, whereas 40 percent of respondents disagree with this issue, with the mean 
value of 3.73 and standard deviation 1.14.

[CHUNK 16]
t of respondents disagree with this issue, with the mean 
value of 3.73 and standard deviation 1.14. 
The interview with workers of the surveyed RMG factories reveals that a 
significant percentage (40 percent) stongly opined that their organizations have 
production progress control system, while 26.67 percent, 13.33 percent and 13.33 
percent are agree,neutral and disagree with this matter. The respondents were asked 
whether the organization practices diversity management or not. About 67 percent 
have replied that they have a well practiced diversity management system but a 
significant portion of the respondents (20 percent) were in neutral position, with a 
mean value of 3.93which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard 
deviation 1.2.

[CHUNK 17]
h a 
mean value of 3.93which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard 
deviation 1.2. 
From the analysis it is noted that 33.33 percent strongly agree with the 
statement that the organization provides the equal employment opportunity for all 
employees and associates irrespective of the employees race, color, religion, age, 
sex, creed, national origin, ancestry, marital status, familial status, affection and 
sexual orientation, disability, and 26.67 percent agree with this but a good number 
of respondents (13.33 percent) disagree with this statement, with a mean of 3.53 
which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation 1.51.

[CHUNK 18]
with a mean of 3.53 
which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation 1.51. 

It is the policy of most of the RMG industries to keep workplace free of 
harassment. Harassment by co-workers, customers, vendors, agents or any other 
third parties is strictly forbidden. Any associate or worker who believes that he/she 
has been subjected to harassment, or has seen someone else harassed, must report it 
immediately to his/her supervisor or the local Human Resources Division. Although 
majority of the respondents (63.34 percent) are either strongly in agreement or in 
agreement that the they are not harassed by the top level executives,t 20 respondents 
reported that employees are harrased by the top level executives. The mean is 3.8 
which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation is 1.62.

[CHUNK 19]
s. The mean is 3.8 
which lies in between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation is 1.62. 
The employers association of RMG sector of Bangladesh is committed to 
maintaining a work environment free from violence, threats of violence, intimidation 
and other disruptive behavior. Employers of this sector are committed to take 
seriously all reports of such incidents and deal with them promptly and 
appropriately. Individuals who commit such acts may be removed from the 
premises and may be subject to disciplinary action. It is observed from the analysis 
that out of 150 respondents 60 are strongly and 30 are positively expressed that their 
organization do not permit workplace violence. But a significant number of 
respondents (20%) disagree with this statement. Here the mean is 3.67 which lies in 
between Agree and Neutral position and standard deviation is 1.62. Respondents 
were asked whether organization has acceptable use of information technologies.

[CHUNK 20]
s 1.62. Respondents 
were asked whether organization has acceptable use of information technologies. 
Examination of their answers to this question reveals that 70 percent of respondents 
strongly believe that they have information dissemination system by using modern 
information technologies and a considerable portion of respondents have neutral 
thinking regarding this issue, which calculated mean is 3.93 and deviation among 
the respondents response is 1.69. 
Figure 1 shows the means and standard deviations of the variables of 
compliance practice in the surveyed garment industries.

[CHUNK 21]
and standard deviations of the variables of 
compliance practice in the surveyed garment industries. In the Figure 1 variables 
like the organization has a good housekeeping storage, the storage is well organized, 
the operations are handled efficiently, organization improves work posture for 
greater efficiency, organization improves monitoring and controlling system to 
minimize mistakes, organization designs responsible and flexible jobs, organization 
removes fatigue to keep workers alert and productive, organization's production 
layout is appropriate, the organization encourages group work, organization has a 
production progress control system, rganization practices diversity management, 
organization provides the equal employment opportunity, employees are not 
harassed by the top level executives, organization doesn't have workplace

[CHUNK 22]
unity, employees are not 
harassed by the top level executives, organization doesn't have workplace 

violence, and organization has acceptable use of information technologies denote A, 
B, C, D,E, F,G, H, I, J, K,L,M,N and O respectively. 
Figure 01: Graphical presentation of Means and Standard Deviations of the Statements 

0.5

1.5

2.5

3.5

Mean
Standard Deviation
 
 
Testing of Hypotheses 
The 99% acceptance zone (confidence level) confirms two equal areas of 0.495 
each. From the Normal Distribution table it can be found that the appropriate Z 
value for 1% significance level is 2.58. Now the limits of the acceptance zone can 
be determined as: 
Standard Error = 
0309

1197
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now standardizing the sample mean, Z = 
 
 
 
 
 
0309



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
= 3.83+0.10062 
 
= 3.930 (Upper limit) 
 
 
 
 
0309



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
= 3.83 0.10002 = 3.729 (Lower limit) 


 
 
 
 
 = 3.83 
 Sample Standard Deviation (S) =

[CHUNK 23]
= 3.83 0.10002 = 3.729 (Lower limit) 


 
 
 
 
 = 3.83 
 Sample Standard Deviation (S) = 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1197
2007
 
 
 
 
 
 = 0.1197 (See table 06 in the appendix) 
From the analysis it is revealed that the means of ten statements lie within the 
acceptance zone and five fall outside the acceptance zone. So, it can be concluded 
that the null hypothesis is accepted. However, factors that are fallen inside the 
rejected zone should be given much more concentration. They are as follows: 
1. The operations are handled efficiently 
2. Organization improves monitoring and controlling system to minimize 
mistakes 
3. Organization removes fatigue to keep workers alert and productive 
4. Organization provides the equal employment opportunity 
5. Organization does not have workplace violence. 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The international textile business is tremendously competitive.

[CHUNK 24]
5. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The international textile business is tremendously competitive. In the context of 
growing competition among RMG exporting countries and consumer preference for 
products that meet internationally recognized standards, it is essential for 
Bangladesh s RMG suppliers to improve compliance in their factories. RMG 
authorities in Bangladesh should implement effective policies on housekeeping, 
material storage and handling, work station design, fair wage, fair disciplinary 
action, and workplace violence. RMG is, however, the most flourishing sector in 
Bangladesh and it would be imperative that each and every issue related to 
improvement of productivity as well as quality is strictly followed to survive in the 
global market. Owners of RMG factories must emphasize on employment 
conditions, working conditions and occupational safety and health management to 
be more competitive in the international trade of textile and clothing business era.

[CHUNK 25]
management to 
be more competitive in the international trade of textile and clothing business era. 
Moreover, regular practice of compliance codes of conduct can bring higher price of 
products, lower labor unrest, less worker turnover rate, highest worker morality, 

highest productivity and product quality, smooth industrial relation as well as global 
image and reputation. So, Bangladesh RMG firms need to deal with above 
mentioned compliance issues strictly in order to remain competitive in the global 
market. 
Recommendations 
1. RMG factories should ensure proper production and official layout with 
perfect place materials, tools. Organization should tape up unused machine 
and keep it away from the manufacturing plant safely. 
2. All of the employees related with this potential industry should be 
enthusiastic to avoid the conflict of interests.

[CHUNK 26]
ees related with this potential industry should be 
enthusiastic to avoid the conflict of interests. This means that employees 
and employers should not place themselves in situation that might face 
them to choose between their own interest, business or financial interest and 
the interests of readymade garment industries. 
3. Workers should be properly seated for waist and foot rest. Workforce is the 
heart of anyorganization. RMG factories should guarantee the workforce s 
proper rest for the fix time which can easily be helpful for the productivity 
of this industry. 
4. Industries should provide chair with backrest. Fatigue will surely arise 
during work in a place; to remove such type of tiredness garment factories 
should make available place with suitable chair which can ensure backrest 
of the workforce in the right time. 
5. RMG industries should have adequate leg space to allow easy leg 
movement of the workers.

[CHUNK 27]
time. 
5. RMG industries should have adequate leg space to allow easy leg 
movement of the workers. That means layout of the manufacturing plant 
should be more spacious. 
6. To be competitive, industries should comply with international standard 
code, such as ISO or imported countries standard code. 
7. Factories should have effective fire distinguisher and separate and adequate 
space for entrance and exit of the workers. Every displays and control 
systems should be clear to all employees and workers. 
8. RMG industries should ensure health, safety and standard work 
environment for the employees. In this case, organizations should provide 
proper ventilation, sufficient light and air. For organizing such facilitiesm 
owners should comply at a minimum with legal standards, minimize the use 
and discharge of hazardous substances and promote recycling of resources.

[CHUNK 28]
ndards, minimize the use 
and discharge of hazardous substances and promote recycling of resources. 

REFERENCES 
Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA). 2010. Main 
Functions 
BGMEA 
(2010). 
Available 
from: 
http: 
//www. 
bgmea.com.bd/home/pages/aboutus. Accessed June 14, 2010. 
Bangladesh Knitwear Manufactures and Exporters Association (BKMEA). 2010. Social 
Compliance: 
Ongoing 
Initiatives 
BKMEA 
(2010). 
Available 
from: 
 Accessed June 14, 2010. 
Das, Subrata. 2008. Social Compliance Issue in the Apparel Sector of Bangladesh. Official 
web site of Fiber 2 Fashion. 
Haider, Mohammed Ziaul. 2007. Competitiveness of the Bangladesh Ready-made Garment 
Industry in Major International Markets. Asia-Pacific Trade and Investment 
Review Vol. 3, No. 1, June . 
Hossain, Hameeda. 2007. Compliance The Garment Crisis: Who Done It? Bangladesh 
Garments Industry. 
Islam, Sinful. 2005.

[CHUNK 29]
07. Compliance The Garment Crisis: Who Done It? Bangladesh 
Garments Industry. 
Islam, Sinful. 2005. In Bangladesh, garment workers' payday not a sure thing 
Brainstorming An Investigative View. 
International Labor Organization. 2010. International Trade Agreements and the 
Cambodian Garment Industry: How Has the Multi-Fiber Agreement Affected 
Cambodia? 
Khan, Shahiduzzaman. 2007. Challenges Facing the Garments Industry. The Financial 
Express. January 27. 
German Embassy Dhaka. 2010. Social and Environmental Standards in the Bangladesh 
Ready-Made 
Garment 
Sector 
Available 
from: 
 Accessed June 15, 2010. 
People s Daily Online. June 03, 2008. Bangladesh Implementing Minimum Wage in 
Garment Industry. China. 
The Daily New Age. April 19, 2009. Garment industry still flouting minimum compliance. 
2009. Editorial. 
United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). 2008. Women Seeking 
Accountability in the Bangladeshi Garment Industry. Available from: 
 Accessed June 15, 2010.

[CHUNK 30]
king 
Accountability in the Bangladeshi Garment Industry. Available from: 
 Accessed June 15, 2010. 

APPENDIX 
Demographical Analysis of Respondents 
From this analysis, respondents gender, age, designation and monthly income are shown in 
tabular form. These are given below one by one: 
TABLE 1 
GENDER OF RESPONDENTS 
Type of Respondents
Frequency
Percent
Cumulative Percent
Male 

76.7 
76.7 
Female 

23.3 
100.0 
Total 

100.0 
 
Source: Field Survey 2009 
 
TABLE 2 
 AGE OF RESPONDENTS 
Age
Frequency
Percent
Cumulative Percent
21-25

10.0 
10.0 
26-30

26.7 
36.7 
31-35

23.3 
60.0 
36-40

23.3 
83.3 
41-45

13.3 
96.7 
51-55

3.3 
100.0 
Total

100.0
Source: Field Survey - 2009 
 
TABLE-03 
MONTHLY INCOME OF RESPONDENTS 
Monthly Income 
Frequency 
Percent 
Valid Percent 
Cumulative Percent 
Below Tk. 10,000 

70.0 
70.0 
70.0 
Tk. 10,000 - Tk. 30,000 

26.7 
26.7 
96.7 
Tk. 30,000 - Tk. 50,000 

3.3 
3.3 
100.0 
Total 

100.0 
100.0 
 
Source: Field Survey - 2009

